Source URL: https://notdivided.org

The Department of War is threatening to
Invoke the Defense Production Act to force Anthropic to serve their model to the military and "tailor its model to the military's needs"
Label the company a "supply chain risk"
All in retaliation for Anthropic sticking to their red lines to not allow their models to be used for domestic mass surveillance and autonomously killing people without human oversight.
The Pentagon is negotiating with Google and OpenAI to try to get them to agree to what Anthropic has refused.
They're trying to divide each company with fear that the other will give in. That strategy only works if none of us know where the others stand. This letter serves to create shared understanding and solidarity in the face of this pressure from the Department of War.
We are the employees of Google and OpenAI, two of the top AI companies in the world.
We hope our leaders will put aside their differences and stand together to continue to refuse the Department of War's current demands for permission to use our models for domestic mass surveillance and autonomously killing people without human oversight.
Signed,
SIGNATORIES
Google: 583 signatories (all of whom are current employees)
OpenAI: 93 signatories (all of whom are current employees)
Juan Felipe Ceron Uribe
Current employee, OpenAI, Research Engineer
Tom Schaul
Current employee, Google, Research Scientist
Karl Cobbe
Current employee, OpenAI, Research Scientist
Robert O'Callahan
Current employee, Google, Senior Staff Software Engineer
Steven Heidel
Current employee, OpenAI, Member of Technical Staff
Kimberly Stachenfeld
Current employee, Google, Research Scientist
Rif A. Saurous
Current employee, Google, Principal Research Scientist
Pamela Mishkin
Current employee, OpenAI
Relja Aranđelović
Current employee, Google, Research Scientist
Stephanie Chan
Current employee, Google, Staff Research Scientist
Kevin Slagle
Current employee, OpenAI, Research Scientist
Nikolas Tezak
Current employee, OpenAI, Research and AI Systems Engineer
Atish Agarwala
Current employee, Google, Research Scientist
Gabriel Wu
Current employee, OpenAI, Member of Technical Staff
Leo Gao
Current employee, OpenAI, Researcher
William Feng
Current employee, OpenAI, Research Scientist
Angelica Chen
Current employee, Google, Senior Research Scientist
Anonymous
Current employee, Google, Senior Research Scientist
Viorica Patraucean
Current employee, Google, Research Scientist
Anonymous
Current employee, Google, Senior research scientist
Show all 676 signatories
Add Your Name
Current and former employees of Google and OpenAI are invited to sign. You may sign anonymously. All signatures are verified before being published.
FULL NAME
Optional. Recommended even if signing anonymously for verification purposes.
COMPANY
Select one
Google
OpenAI
EMPLOYMENT STATUS
Select one
Current employee
Former employee
ROLE / TITLE (optional but always public, even if signing anonymously)
Sign anonymously. Your name will not be published.
Your signature will appear as "Anonymous [Role/Title if provided], verified [current/former] employee at [Company]." Only one organizer reviews anonymous signatures. Your personal data (name, email) is automatically deleted within 24 hours of verification.
VERIFICATION METHOD
Email verification
We'll send a verification link to your work email. Note: the email will be visible in your inbox.
Google Form email verification
After submitting, you'll open a short Google Form and sign in with your work Google account (@google.com, @openai.com). This verifies your email without sending anything to your inbox.
Alternative verification
For those who prefer not to use a work email or don't have one (e.g. former employees). Upload a photo of a work badge, send us a message on Signal, point us to a co-signer who can vouch for you, or otherwise provide proof of employment.
WORK EMAIL
Only used for verification. Never published or shared.
Sign This Letter
Frequently Asked Questions
Have you thought about broadening the requests to be more comprehensive?
Who is behind this?
Who can sign?
How is my data handled?
What if I accidentally fill out the form twice?
I signed anonymously but now want to put my name on it. How can I fix that?
How do you verify signatures?
Have there been any mistakes in signature verification for this letter?
What infrastructure does this site use and is it secure?